Welcome to ELearning!
This software is designed to help you learn the basics of Esperanto quickly and easily.

Esperanto is the most widely used constructed language; since it's invention in 1887, it has spread to over 100 countries worldwide and has tens of thousands of fluent speakers. Many believe that learning Esperanto provides a strong basis for learning other languages more quickly and easily. This software was designed to get you started on that journey.

Now that you've created an account, you will be taken to the main options page. Here you will see 5 columns of icons. Each icon represents an activity or game, and each row a level. The Learni section of each level contains a vocabulary lesson and a grammar lesson. Take as long as you need to study these sections in whatever order you'd like. The Apliki section contains two corresponding games, one testing your knowledge of the level's vocabulary and the other your understanding of the grammar concepts taught thus far. You'll receive more instructions on how to play these games the first time you open them.

The final row contains links to the boss level for each game. This will test you on both vocabulary and grammar you've learned in the lesson, and give you feedback on the mistakes you are making. It will only be unlocked once you've completed the vocabulary and grammar games of that level.

Completing the boss game unlocks the next level. You may need to try each game several times before unlocking the next, but don't worry - you'll be learning the whole time!

At any point you can press the help button located in the bottom left of the screen to get level specific help or to return to this screen. You can also use the dictionary, located at the bottom right, to look up words in Esperanto to English or vice versa. Beware though - during games these buttons will decrement your score.

A few words about special characters: Esperanto contains several letters not present in English, including ŝ, ĝ, ĉ, and ĵ. It does not, however, use the letter x. For your convenience, you can always type a letter followed by x to get the equivalent accented letter. For example, "jx" will be converted to ĵ.

Bona sorto!