data/VocabPictures/apple.jpg~Esperanto nouns all end with the letter -o in the dictionary. Thus, unlike in English, it is possible to determine unambiguously that a given word is a noun. Any word that ends in -o in the dictionary is a noun, and every noun ends in -o. Simple, eh? ~La pomO.
data/VocabPictures/kato.jpg~One short word that you should know, and will likely use continually in your study of Esperanto, is the article "la", which means "the". It is used in much the same way as its English equivalent, although there are a few nuances that you will pick up as you go along. Also, although we haven't gotten to agreement yet, it's worth mentioning that "la" does not agree with its noun - that means that "la" will always be "la", and never change form, no matter what else may change in the sentence. Any noun not preceeded by "la" is "indefinite", which means that in English it would be preceeded by "a". ~LA kato estas bela.
data/VocabPictures/hundo.jpg~All verbs in esperanto in the present tense end in "as." This means that, if you want to make a statement about the present, you can take the verb form ending in "i" and replace it with "as". Unlike in English, there are no irregular verbs in Esperanto - all verbs are treated the same when conjugated.~La hundo estAS bruna.
data/VocabPictures/muso.jpg~Adjectives, such as "malgranda" (small) and "amuza" (funny), end in "a" in the nominative case (we'll get to case later - don't worry if you don't know what it means). This is true regardless of the noun modified - there is no gender agreement (adjectives must agree in case and number, but again, we'll get to that later). In Esperanto, unlike in English, adjectives may come after the noun rather than before it, although they don't have to. Thus, we may say either "La kato bela" or "La bela kato".~La muso amuzA estas malgrandA.
data/VocabPictures/eat.jpeg~The verb form ending in "i" that you see in the vocab lists is called the infinitive. It is equivalent to the form of a verb beginning with "to" in English. It has a number of different uses, but for now you'll be using it after verbs like "want" which are followed by another verb. ~Mi volas manĝi.
0
data/VocabPictures/hundo.jpg~Esperanto has a nominative and accusative case. This means a noun looks different when it is the subject of a verb and when it is the object, in the same way as the pronouns "I" and "me" are different in English. The nominative case is just the form of the noun that you see in the dictionary, whereas the accusative case is formed by adding "-n" to the nominative.~li ŝatas la katon./la kato ŝatas lin.
data/VocabPictures/catmouse.jpeg~Have you been wondering, in your studies so far, how Esperanto handles plurals? Well, if so, you're about to find out. Plurals in Esperanto are much simpler than in English - whereas in English you encounter words such as "goose" whose plural form is irregular, in Esperanto plurals are always formed in the same way. A plural noun ends in -j, which, when combined with the final -o present on all Esperanto nouns, is pronounced as the "oy" in "boy". The same suffix is used to pluralize adjectives, although the resulting ending is pronounced "eye" instead. The article does not change in the plural, nor do verbs. ~La katoj manĝas muson.
data/VocabPictures/catmouse.jpeg~A note on plurals and the accusative case: when you add the accusative suffix to the plural form of a word, it is simply added on to the end, as another suffix. Thus, "musoj" becomes "musojn", and "belaj" becomes "belajn". If you've studies Latin, which has a separate form for all four of the possible case and number combinations dealt with here, you'll see that the Esperanto way of doing this is far simpler. Also, you don't use the accusative after the verb "esti". ~La katoj manĝas musojn.
1
data/VocabPictures/gimme.jpg~Now for the lesson we know you've all been waiting for - how to boss people around! (or not - in fact, we'd rather you not.) But right now, we're going to study the Esperanto imperative, which is linguist-speak for the form of the verb that you use when giving a command or making a (forceful) request. Do you remember how we formed the present tense, by removing the final -i of the infinitive (dictionary form) of the verb, and replacing it with -as? Well, to form the imperative, we again remove the -i, but instead of -as, we replace it with -u. It's as simple as that! ~Donu ĝin al mi!
data/VocabPictures/speaking.jpeg~Although you're probably busy giving people orders now, there's still material to cover in this section. We're going to go over questions, so you can ask people if they're okay with being bossed around before you do so. (Or not. Your call.) Yes/no questions in Esperanto are similar to those of English - you just take the original sentence, and add the word "ĉu" at the beginning, without moving any of the words around (Linguists may want to object to this description, but please bear with me; it makes more sense to the vast majority of the population). This little word, or "particle" as it's called officially, is basically equivalent to the English word "do" when used to introduce a question. Easy, enit? ~Ĉu vi parolas Esperanton?
data/VocabPictures/yesno.jpeg~One last thing: you need to know how to answer questions in Esperanto. If you want to agree, you would answer "jes", which works exactly like the English word "yes" (and is pronounced the same as well). To disagree, you say "ne", which, as you will see in the next chapter, translates both "no" and "not". Happy answering! ~"Ĉu vi parolas Esperanton? Jes!
data/VocabPictures/number.jpeg~And finally, some basic info on numbers: there are no irregular numbers in Esperanto - forms like eleven, twelve, and so on are just "ten one" (dek unu), "ten two" (dek du), and so on. "Twenty" is just "two ten" (dudek), thirty is "three ten" (tridek), etc. You get the picture... ~Tricent dudek unu: 321.
2
data/VocabPictures/hundo.jpg~Now that we've started learning about expressions relating to time, it's about time (pun intended!) to start thinking about tenses. Unlike English's multiple, complex tenses and rules for how and when to use them, Esperanto has a comparatively simple system consisting of three tenses (present, past, and future), one of which you already know (the present). Just as verbs in the present tense replace their infinitive suffix -i with the present tense suffix -as, verbs in the past and future tenses replace the -i with -is and -os, respectively. Thus, "was" and "were" translate to "estis", and "will be" translates to "estos". Note that there is no Esperanto word corresponding to the English auxiliary "will", since the future tense is indicated directly by a suffix. ~Mi manĝos la viandon./La hundo manĝis muson.
data/VocabPictures/eat.jpeg~Something to keep in mind as you learn Esperanto is that, with a few exceptions, you never have to use a construction equivalent to the English "I am X-ing". Instead, you just say "I X". This is true in the past and future as well - "Mi manĝis" can translate both "I ate" and "I was eating". It is possible to say something equivalent to "I am eating" in Esperanto, but you rarely need to (and it sounds strange most of the time) - the necessary verb forms will be covered in a future lesson. So for now, stick to the three tenses you know - they're what you'll be using most of the time anyway. ~La knabo manĝas la manĝaĵon.
3
data/VocabPictures/kato.jpg~Have you wondered yet how you say that something is yours? Well, you're about to learn. Esperanto pronouns can all be easily turned into possessive pronouns simply by adding -a to the end. The resulting forms are grammatically adjectives, and must agree in number and case just like any other adjective. They're pretty easy to use, once you get the hang of it! There's one catch: in the third person, the possessive pronoun is "sia" if it refers to the subject of the sentence. This is called a "reflexive pronoun"; we'll discuss them more in the next chapter. ~Mia kato estas bela.
data/VocabPictures/dontgo.jpg~Negation in Esperanto is one of the easiest parts of this lesson. There's only one new vocabulary item to learn, and it doens't change, ever. The Esperanto word for "not" is "ne", and it is placed before the verb. "Ne" can also be placed before any other word in the sentence, in which case it marks that particular word as negative, rather than the sentence as a whole. For instance, if you've just been asked "Ĉu vi iras al mia domo?", you might respond "Mi ne iras." simply to say you weren't going, but "Ne mi iras." if you knew that someone else, instead of you, was going. ~Mi ne iras. 
data/VocabPictures/shrug.jpeg~At this point in time, you will be learning the basics of Esperanto question words. There are a large number of these, and they're organized in a very regular and logical way, but now is not the time to try and assimilate all of them, even given their relative simplicity when compared to those of other languages. Thus, we give you five simple question words here: kio (what?), kiu (who?), kie (where?), kiel (how?) and kiam (when?). Notice that they all start with "Ki-" - that will be important later. You should try them out! They're used just like in English - they go at the front of the sentence. The only thing you have to watch out for is that kio and kiu still have to take the accusative, even though they're at the front of the sentence. ~Kio estas tio?
4
data/VocabPictures/catmirror.jpeg~I bet you've been wondering, as you've been studying these past few lessons, how to make the same noun both subject and object of a verb. You usually can't just repeat the noun - if you said "la kato vidas la katon", the second cat would be different from the first. In English, we have such words as himself, herself, themselves, myself, and so on; all of them end in "-self". However, Esperanto is even simpler. If the subject of the verb is "mi", "vi", or "ni", you do just repeat the pronoun - there will be no confusion, since there can be only one of I, you, or we. However, if the subject is a third-person pronoun (li, ŝi, ri, ĝi, ili) or a regular noun, you'll need to use a different word. That word in "si", which normally seen in the accusative case because it can't occur as a subject (think about why...). Thus, our above example becomes "la kato vidas sin", which does, in fact, translate to "the cat sees him/herself". If you wanted to say the same thing about yourself, you would say "Mi vidas min". ~Mia amiko volas vidi sin. 
data/VocabPictures/boyapple.jpeg~One more thing to keep in mind when working with reflexives - although you can usually guess where you'll need to use "si", since the corresponding pronoun in English will end in "-self", there is an exception to this rule: possessive pronouns. In English, while it is possible to form a reflexive possessive pronoun (it doesn't end in "-self"; the forms we're talking about here end in "own", e.g. "his own", "her own", etc...), it is not required to do so, and the regular possessive pronouns are normally used instead. In Esperanto, though, if you say the literal equivalent of "He sees his cat", the person refered to by "his" is not the same person as is doing the seeing. To translate this sentece, you need to say "Li vidas sian katon", using the possessive form of the reflexive pronoun, "sia". ~La knabino manĝas sian pomon.
5
